# **EVOLUTION, BEHAVIOUR & ECOLOGY**

My initial definition of evolution: The reaction of an organism or
species to an environmental stimulus over time.

Natural selection: The behaviour of certain traits over others by the
natural environment.

Fit to its environment.

What is confusing, unclean or seems impossible about evolution?

-   Naturally some religious competition in my eyes

## **Why the topic in the first semester?**

Organisms don't always become better adapted to the environment because
the environment changes too.

-   Species come extinct when they can't evolve as fast as the
    environment changes

Most schools do wb and molecular biology in the first semester

-helps you to understand way thing else w/o that you must have a lot of
facts

\- This is the why of biology.

\- The modern way is evolutionary history.

\- So much medical insight to be gained by knowing we evolved to become
hunters and gatherers.

\- Don't use humans as your example to try and understand the biological
process (Culture and ego)

# **NOTES AND STUDYING**

## **Feyman technique**

Write what you know about the topic by hand

Explain to a younger person

Notice what you can derive, explain

Follow up and then repeat

## **Notes**

-   Don't dictate but pareapharse what the proffesor says. They wont say
    anything that they think is useless.

-   Leave some space in fort for additional and leave back empty for
    later

-   Improve gem who with others after class.

-   Work together to determine main points, their relation and how they
    relate to points in previous classes. Shouldn't be laundry list of
    materials

-   Write this down on blank spaces.

-   Use reading to learn about the topics you all don't understand.

-   Have a new note book( with blank pages at the front), develop

-   Do not transfer anything you do not understand.

-   Write in complete paragraph, write out explanations in your words

-   Add outline of the day in the beginning of the book

-   Keep up day by day

-   A list of topics and subtopics with any explanation

-   To study, look at the outline and see what you can do. Use that to
    guide your test prep

**CHAPTER 18: EVOLUTION AND THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES**

All organisms evolved from a different species and evolution is ongoing.

Evolution is the re rationale to all biological processes and drives
current curiosity

## **18.1 UNDERSTANDING EVOLUTION** - **Evolution as a science precedes Darwin.**

Age of the eart is integral in early evolution conversations. Galapager
Tom: Similar organisms on different islands with some distinct
differences.

Alfred Wallace and Charles Darwin independently thought of natural
selection simultaneously. Natural selection ( survival for the fittest),
the more prolific reproduction of individuals with favourable traits
that survive environmental change because of those traits. The how
evolution ( adaptive evolution.....other types)

1.  Most traits of an organism are inherited

2.  Competition for space in every generation (from Mathews)

3.  Observable genetic evolution, characteristics that compete better
    will be pursued to progeny- Decent with modification change in
    population over generations. Non genetic variations do not
    contribute to evolution because not inheritable

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
A.  Mutation or change in DNA new adults can have (+), (-) or no effect
    (neutral mutation) with varying degrees.

B.  Sexual reproduction= Unique mixing of parent DNA, unique combo.
    Adaptation a heritable trait that helps an organism survival and
    reproduction in the present environment.

-   Genetic variations overtime contributes to fitness.

-   Favourability- Environmental conditions (not static), directions can
    fit.

### **Divergent evolution** evolution in diverse direction from a common point. 

### **Convergent Evolution** Similar traits evolve independently in species that do not show common ancestry.

Same destination, different journeys (group of traits).

### Homologus structures, some overall construction/ synonymous parts in differwnt species.

### Vestigial structures Unused structures with function appendix. 

### Analogous structures Similarities not done to adore evolutionary relationship for common reaction to the envirnoment.

-   Ex. many arctic aanimals are white because arctic is white not
    because of common ancsetry.

### Misconceptions

-   Scintific theory = Common ways theory.

-   An individual organism cannot evolve.

-   Evolution not about the beginning of life

-   Evolution not intentional, fast logical outcome

-   The variations must already be present to be selected for evidence:

> Fossils
>
> Anatomy and embryology ( homologus and vestigial structures)
>
> Homogeography ( like mainland/ \\Island similarities)
>
> Molecular biology: Similarity in Dna, Similarity in anscestry.

### Artificial selection: 

### Evolution driven by decision of people ( whether intentional or not) people determine which individual will reproduce and/or survive.

\- Generation by generation; the preferrable slsectedbattained
generation.

\- "Artefact of human activity" De es

\- "Different with modificatio" Darwin

\- Modern fruits and vegetables are a good example of artificial
selection.

\- Most of what we eat is a product of intentional artificial selection.

### Natural selection: Natural, ecological processes determine which individuals survive and reproduce.

\- Do not have to be the predator/prey situation

\- Mechanism of evolution.

\- Due to what circumntances natural selection occurs

I.  Competition

II. Individual not identical

III. Some variations inheritable

## Three circumnstances

I.  More BOM than environment can support- Not enough resources for all
    to survive; don't all survive to reproduce.

II. Individuals aren't identical Some different genetic, not all
    different genetic

III. Some of the variations among individuals is heritable.

-   Rooted in genes (how is this different from the one above)

## Consequences of those three circumnstances

1.  Individuals best suited to environment (fit) most likely to leave
    offspring (Natural selection)

2.  Because only reproduced genes are passed on, competition of gene
    foster changes ( evolution)

\- There is still room for bad louck in ecology. Fit organisms can still
die before reproduction, chance exists overtime, probably is truer.

" Evolution doesn't occur so that anything"

\- Evolution not on purpose, it is as a rsult, not a goal. The
consequences of evolution are not "why" for evolution.

Some of the real time evidences:

\- Look for evidences for hypothesis being wrong, not for reasons they
are right

\- Try to reject hypothesis. If you can't its apt to be right
unintentional artificial selection:

Due to the mean yielding unintentional effect or we do not know we were
selecting? Or both?

People have trouble brathing. Modern cops must be babied on a town.

Why would a physician make you keep taking antibiotics even when you are
telling the truth?

# 08/30 LECTURE

\- Don't develop the potential to evolve because of exposure to
environmental purpose unless on genetic variations that just happen to
occur.

\- We don't write untides on unknown mutations (a lot)

Observations of evolution in progress

Unntentional artificial selection may produce a super bag.

Ex 1:- Antibiotics are for bacteria

-   Not enough antibacterial in your system to kill all tje bacteria;
    leaving just a few over, they'll reproduce exponentially still.

-   Why do some survive and some not?

-   Bacteria are not genetically identical (never to me)

\- **Q1:** How does bacteria even mutate if they reproduce asexually?
Some more questions on 8/30 reading google due

\- Maybe come on Wedneday. Office hours.

\- Taking antibiotics gives advantage to the antibiotic resistant
bacterium; useless w/o bacteria

\- Evolution involves trade offs; genes that contribute to fitness in
one way typically distract from fitness somewhere else

\- Pretty much an inherent costs to mutated advantages.

\- Pre antibiotics, the bacteria compete with each other.

\- Antibiotics example nalogues to superweeds example

\- Taking all your ntibiotics doesn't ensure all the bacterium are gone
(answers to question)

\- Resistance doesn't mean 100 % resistance.

**Ex 2**

-   Why do commercially- hooted become reportedly mature at smaller size
    than periodically.

-   Commercial kept bigger fish and returned smaller fish

-   Wet fish memory made of fish; fish left to reproduce and the small
    enough to fit the net

-   Again, relies on the just happening to mature at smaller size

-   Unintentional artificial selection

## Ex 3

Changes in break depths of gala pages finches following drought

-   400 miles off share, not on a migration path, not until from
    mainland

-   Lots of different examples of evolution w/ the G.I became its
    initial cause drew a lot more

-   Under lively of punch species

-   "Evidences back and forth" with writhes cycles: Short-hand evolution
    that frequently changes direction

-   Islands from mainland tend not to have many species b/c difficult
    for specie to get there.

-   GL volianic ( from volcano) difficult way a lot in holic presence,
    difficult in age for

-   inches seed rating birds in strong hill to break sudor open

-   How will its will unlet martially determine fitness drought on
    island.

i.  Few seeds available one lunge (for whatever leaves) only can bust it
    open

ii. Small hills can't grow

iii. Small birds don't survive/long hills survive

Next generation from large filled parents mostly natural selection
examples due to natural why/how does it switch back? How do small hills
even have an advantage over large hills?

Evolution not a good relationship to conditions of environment

##  Ex 4 

-   Armor of spined stickleback- ocean us take population

-   Take have less and less armour on time

-   Revoke to hide in ocean so are not necessary

-   Lake pops have places to hide and hanging more while helps them to
    hide in the lake

-   Occurs due to already existing mutation

-   Make sure you can explain piece of nutria evidence of revolution by
    natural selection

# Evidence Of Past Evolution 

Regimented change in fertile will survive

Gradual segmented

Decent from common ancestor

"Legacy of structure multiplied by different environment"

How does this prove common ancestry?

Whales have hip bones with no limbs- decent from ancestry that did have
liger

"evolution doesn't make things perfect" not ecologically experience for
whales to have hip bones- will he opaquely lost destroyed things don't
get lost very fast since neither advantageous or disadvantageous

Amino acid sequences of humans most similar to aeneous similar to
humans.

More similarly means more recent common ancestor dissimilar species
evolving predictably due to shared mental pressure

Not umlauted species becoming related

Similar selective faces simulation adaptations

Whale (mammal) descends have land mammal best shark have similar not
related to overall shape.

Similarly, the same

Can convergent species occur geographically if selective presents one
the same?

Humans have common ancestor same point but dissimilar

Look similar but different development

Convergent evolution

How are environmental presentations the same?

Anatomical homologies: bones in the wings

Wings: Convergent evolution (common ancestor had a lant leg, not wing)
but similar in the way a shark and mammal are similar

Similarly but not same structure from same ancestor

Know differentiation of evolution and natural selection but generally
knowing the meaning is enough.

Mix of MCQ and SAQ

Anything discussed in class ( renew non bio stuff too?)

Evolution doesn't result in perfect form, it's the farm that vented for
summarily in the past, could very well be better)

French doesn't fly them from mainland on purpose

One funch species on mainland in Eucudor

-13 funch species in G.I

Gangsts/ the island (GI) would be rare too, even that too last and very
unlikely that finches how to GL to Hagen

GL habitat variation

Islands difficult from each other's different environmental pressures

Two individual's summaries

Not one species/ on land different directions of evolution

More than one on an island

Any of these species make or less related to the ancestral finch? Does
amount of dangerous relate to amount of relatedness amount of dangerous
relate to amount of relatedness to ancestors does it even match?

# Essay Examples 

When you write an essay that includes a technical team, plan the class,
define the team to demonstrate you know its meaning

When answering a question, one we answering like when explaining it to a
professor (you) on to someone with zero language? Who was audience?

Explain your reassuring, finish your thoughts

Complete sentences

Do not use a word to define a word

Examples are often helped in explaining

Define teams of not common knowledge

# 19.1 Population Evolution 

Bending inheritance was the theory before natural selection

Best genes formed to have potential nature, passed

Population genetics discussed in terms of allele for genesis

Genetic change, phenotype change

Natural selection affects frequencies

Gene post scum of all alleles to genetic change with no advantage

Occurs alongside natural relation

Found it wont caring one of in an isolated past of the population that
typical.

Valuation restoration of phenotypes humility -- the part of phenotype
variation from genetic variance (among individuals in a population)

-   Phenitutility, evolution

-   Genetic variance- diversity of alleles and genotypes

-   Inbreeding depression- inbreeding discard at toping chance of should
    dilution alleles)

-   By chance some ages have male children

-   By chance very different from before

-   Founder effort also of plunged banes asses a lot of individuals have
    gene flow of alludes un and art of a population due to migiation of
    individual of geometer

-   Some pops have male of than others

-   Plants spread pollen

-   Can intro new genetic variation mutation

-   "Species evolve because of mutation accused overtime"

-   Intro ward genotype and phenotype variance

-   Natural selection selects truly performed by tumbles in mating.

-   More gene flow b/denies, lens difference and ucevuon

# 19.3 Adaptive evolution 

-   Natural selection= adaptive evolution

-   Not all evolution is adaptive!!

-   Acts not idol allules

-   Evolutionary fitness

-   Adaptative litters only matters abit companies to other age
    anomously of the same population

-   Stabilizing selection preferred average an extreme phenotype

-   Directional selection

-   Strong selective on males to obtain matter

-   Same species six role reviewed so UV sexual demography

-   Some traits and sexual traits that distract from handicap principle.

-   N.S cannot make a perfect age, cannot select mutable limited by
    genetic mutations and gene flow. Net effect galleles often reduce
    certainty of UV.

# MODES OF EVOLUTION

## MUTATIONS, INBREEDING, DEPRESSION, COMMON PATTERNS OF EVOLUTION, GENE FLOW, & GENETIC DRIFT 

Natural selection is not the only mechanisms of evolution, but it is the
most important population: a group of individuals of the same species
with opportunities to interbreed (offspring able to reproduce).

-   Species: the potential to interbreed (what if they had the
    opportunity) in nature, members of same species not necessarily same
    population.

-   Some species have only one population, but some species have lots of
    populations.

-   Gene: a unit of heredity made of DNA

-   Affects same nature of an organisms allele- a variant of a gene- e.g
    a length of DNA that codes for a population genetic trait.

-   Variant of alleles on same gene- difficult effect

-   Natural section concerned with alleles, not gender filters the
    relative contribution an individual makes to the gene pool of the
    next generation.

-   Highest tends to be what's best

-   Filters = strength

### Processes that allele cause evolution

1.  Mutation (new allele = new genetic varieties = new possibilities)

2.  Evolution by natural or artificial selection (adapts population to
    amend condition)

3.  Gene flow

4.  Genetic drift (chance change in allele frequency)

Mutation- a change in the DNA sequence

Mutation occurs randomly (not because it may be beneficial)

Create new genetic variants (only case where new happens)

Any specific variants (only case where new happens

Not that many mutations are actually beneficial not all mutations
matter: random change to functional system may become common of its
selected

Male genetic diversity and male capability for evolution/ capacity to
adapt to new circumstances

-   Don't want to expose yourself to mutagens (carry yourself up when
    getting mutated)

-   2 copies of most genes (one from the parent) thus zallules same on
    different

-   Genotype individuals compete the galleles

-   Phenotype not solely genetically determined

-   Natural selection acts on phenotype, not genotype any measurable
    point of an individual

-   Don't necessarily blend

-   Dominant male fit

# 09/13 

Dominant mutant- expressed, affects phenotype

Recessive mutant- typically only expressed of homogenous dominant
harmful alleles rapidly

Selected against with only one copy

Recessive harmful alleles do not affect heterozygotes

And thus, rooted out (acts on phenotype, not genotype)

So, they accumulate in heterozygous individuals

Only harmful when homozygotes

Have a reason evolution didn't lead to perfect organisms

We all carrying harmful recessive alleles

Inbreeding depression- reduction of filters due to mating between
closely mutated organisms

How related is always a relative farm in biology

Most mutations are harmful and have no consequence

Do mutations happen on the allele scale or gene scale? Allele

Inbreeding increases the chance one, harmful alleles will be passed on
homogenously (cannot have children- harmful phenotype)

Dilituous recessive alleles one common but didn't affect fitness in
outbred populations

Hapsbug chin

Become fashionable for germen shepherd to have short back legs

Why so thus individuals have?

Is this artificial selection or inbreeding or both?

# The importance of mutations to populations 

Not good on the individual lent but valuable from the population
perspective because... the same that one beneficial

New genetic mutual only from mutations

Lot of genetic diversity and capability to survive/ respond to mental
change. The alternative is extinction "potential to adapt" genetic
phenotype variation from mutations

I.  Muattions (random, doesn't happen because related for doesn't
    matter)

II. Natural selection (not random, adaptive)

III. Gene flow (not mutually adaptive)

-   Distinction between population can be hard to determine

-   Individuals (their alleles or gamete) more between populations

IV. Genetic drift (not usually adaptive)

V.  Artificial selection (not usually adaptive)

-   Usually don't have to survive on their own

# Common Patterns of Evolution by Natural selection 

1)  Directional natural selection

-   One extreme phenotype is selected for (does thus assume binary
    traits, either/ or) quantitative phenotype addresses thus but what
    about something more qualitative?

-   Look at ape in slides

-   Gallons of being a bell-shaped curve means there was a long period
    of standing selecting the past

-   Length of finch breaks varying with seasons in directional selection

-   Doesn't' necessarily have legs into the same direction for a long
    period of time. The direction can change and change often

2)  Stabilizing selection

-   Intermediate phenotypes selected for highest fitness in intermediate
    phenotype

3)  Developing selection

-   Both extra and intermediate

-   African lack backed selection

# 09/15 

Scientists seek evidence that an idea is wrong

A hypothesis that explains a lot and has survived many attempts at being
moved wrong

Hypothesis must be tested- potentially preferable able to be supported
wrong with evidence

Scientific thinking- open minded people active based on evidence

Scientific based on inductive reasoning- extrapolating from specific to
general: inherently limiting.

This is why status is so important

Is there fermiology for the different diagnosis of certainity? i.e I
know theres one pretty solid but are there any evils between hypo
theories and theory?

Understanding science seeks to find evidence supporting that an idea is
wrong and that we use minds like constant and supportive rather than
proves what male should be understanding?

Are proposed explanations scientific?

We don't talk about the beginnings of life. Can use even talk about them
scientifically given lack of empirical evidence?

# MODES OF EVOLUTION 

## 09/18 

Sexual selection- behaviour and morphology

Male chance is an aspect of natural selection must be suited in survival
and for reproduction.

sexual selection - behavior and morphology

\- mate chance is an aspect of natural selection - must be suited for
surway and for reproduction/ moting ( when mating is a relevant concept
. is it unit for bacteria ) - birdo not the only wund sexual selection
thing Africanlong -tailed undlowboard

no surwat fitness with long tail bugand being attractive to mater
something that survives and doesn\'t reproduce is not fit - animal
phenomena

umally the fermales are choisies about mates because usually the female
invisto more energy + time into the reproduction / post consummation) ;
at the vuy last, gestating - finale fitnes more at stake because they
have less chance for

reproduction ( se males can marte a lot a lot a lot but female goes out
of commission for a while )

evolutionary selective incentive In: we can\'t really understand what
animals can perceive - female unconsciously choosing - it instinct - \#
of offspring among indindury make is super variable

her contribution to the next generation ; her offspring ore her genetic
contribution - there is no fitness of an individual of Their offspring
don\'t reproduce , must produce fit offspring exceptions where makes
nouse the young - then makes one chasien

A wihrer sales are as a few males mate

mate chance vay contributive to evolution

\- probably less directional changes with this one since is based in
instinct ? mate chance mest had to high fitness or otherwise the alleles
causing mate choice will be deletions and worked out

gene flow-alldes moving from one population to another populations vot
totally absolutely 100000 00% separate, some potential for marment

changes frequency of source and destination populations critically
important in preventing inbreeding depression in small pops - greater
genetic diversity + prater capacity presolution - is genetic diversity
un divideantigous ? gene flores randan, don\'t happen in purpose

genetic diversity from gene flow don\'t always painst ( new) alles may
be deletions if and bewoord ont )

genetic drift- chance change in alle frequency , not adaptive
potentially important in small proprifactions

\- when a few induderals of a specs colonize a new moon ( founder
effect) and when they\'ve decreased to a small pop be foodamoment (
bottleneck ) tutte genetic drift in large populations

(almost ces of - only a few survive

not all times when most of pop dies= founder effect

\- has to be randan event not related to natural selection won\'t of se
exemples os slider

creatures continually & constantly subjectof to selection pressure - why
don\'t theo denease genetic diversity = 0000 5 reasons why natural
selection doesvit eliminate genetic variation diploidy (necesare alleles
hidden in heterozygotes )

3\) sometimes heterozygotes better than either homozygote - one sickle
ulf while protects against materia (+) but two are vug harmful (-) -
sometimes hetero has diff- phenotype than homo com 4) nost all genetic
variation affects individual fitness 5) mutations

evolution does not create perfect organism NO!

evolutionary trade - offs ( can\'t prioritize both of they are in
conflict ) natural selection canonly act upen existing genetic variation
-neatures construned by this past evolution mutations rundan, not
adaptive

lag between evolution (response) and environment (relecture (es) Q -
extinction b/c they can\'t withit as fast as were waiting a problem gene
regulation problems (epigenetic processes) interpre w/fitness get it -
turn on and off

# SPECIATION 

so four were been talking about sunny evolutionary charges modusdes
populations of some specico undergoing evolution in dif ferent selective
pressures for long enough (separate euronments) may speciale

or one spaces ellers massively and time until it a new species don\'t
get too hung up on definition of species, its a concept were made up
gene pools have to stay separate for speciation

population w

sometimes same specs don\'t recognize their ability to mate x opportuni
City group of individual organisms that have the potential to infutured
\# fond prince fertile forming \[ under natural arconstance \] vary dine

\- 2 different species contrat produce fertile offspring (ie male)

this definition can\'t always be stated

seporante species are reproductivily 150lastiftare different (also
relevant to two populations of the same species ) give flow b / pops
means they\'re not reproductivity isolated cannot just go by appearance
to differentiate by species anotherway way Indagato distinguerse
species. 1) morphology or

2\) genetics (unique DNA sequences) - universally the same across
species and univonly different

& among other species, not necessarily the most obvious, but necessarily
every difference (look at slide sx)

-sometimes confuso lag- indutid populations and actual separate species
-does it un matter? ele met volley)

gin of new species

allapatie - two populations one physicaly separated idifferent
environments means different selective conditions meaning differences In
evolution

# 18.2 Formation of New Species 

hybrid- infertile euro betaren tuo species

sexually reproducing organismy can only pass on DVA +/ gameter typically
not interbreeding b/ species in the wild

-hypuedo in nature suggest desert pan common ancestor ( interbreeding
species) , distribution same avions geography typically narogersous (\")
gene pool for gagraphically continuar species because of que genefter

allepatric - disperant - afew members ofa species more new geographic
area

presses

vicariance - natural situation physically to organismes - the further
the distance , the more likely speciation

\- probably more difference wong latitude than longitude (I think)

adaptive radiation - many adaptations for single part of agun (centro
serval ve spones) different ages of one pop e/ fund a niche in a new
area anewplenty - ever occurduring alt + \[n+/ or 24-1 chambrenes)
-diploid(m)

fareles species

\- polyphendy (4), futrupland/org w/ (m, can self pollments)
allepolyphonel garmets fans two dif species contiene Species 1-) nemal
gamate firstmatin self polimate

-) julyproud -, sicard making

species 2 -1 polyphard gamete high mite of ridyplenty in porto temporal
solution difference in breeding time Websarany solation garnele barrier

# 18.3 Reconnection and speciation rates 

runfront firmen stability

gradual speciation - like a ramp punctuation equilibrium (donot exclude
gradualism) - like a starreise Quanto changes un environment lefrenine
speciation inte

Reflection

1\) Jynman technique, but I didn\'t actually explain it to a separents
person, just myself.

2\) Pretty much , yuh . I imagined I would need to do some specific
revision or targeted new , but I was satisfied in my ability to explain
waything

3\) answery in second sentance of (2)

4\) I was confident yo?

5\) I was not at all international about blocking ont time specifically
to study ,

6\) more intentionality in scheduling and loting objectives but I uns
pretty comfortable with my readines and mountain that having taken the
quiz even without receiving or grande got . A bad grade would definitely
undermine my confidence through. vey lite method in my studying for this
test

# SPECIATION 

Factors that increase the likelihood of allopathic speciation: 1) diff
selective pressures un diff lications (Will evolve differently)
-virtually no gene flow between populations I vig small amount of gene
flow can make two \"populations indistinguishable 2) many different
populations, not just two - this is not have

\- species heure certain specific habitat requirements

\- just easier to study with island banies

3\) inchat abile frequency differences b/ populations -ex. deer langer
at higher Intitudes aund smaller closer to equatro the two different
pops have diff alle frequencies for size (port #1 100) forunder effect
can cause this factor (e) I was right about temp kg :P inbreeding
depression can apply to individual , not only population ; not only
relevant at population land, really referring to individery fitness

\- I don\'t know that my quiz anowas mayonly reflected that, but this
specific jubiage is kind of new to me

Harrison archipelago

-Drach dande have very different environments

1\) stands for essayer away from each other for birds to intertrond most
likely

ancheplages often sito of adaptive radiation ( = from one species to
many as a result of different adaptation to different relecture
pressures, lots of allespatric speciation, many species resulting ) +/
adaptations to new environment )

IR one Aran bird 754 Hawaiian hanlycraper

nagy to me how the different Galapagos Islands have such different

environments - is understanding how the magnitude of these differences
des necessing?

to himdine a qualifier at all for adaptive radiation ? Is it just kind
of relative what we call adaptive radiation since all lifico a product
of evolution from a common ancestor!

-300 cidhled species in Lake Victoria example

\- when with level co @ low , became created populations - adaptive
radiation how all in one lake

sympati speciation honden to study and provimats , probably not very
important\"

\- not a physical banier but don\'t interact

\- hander to loners they didn\'t speciale somewhere else and then and up
here ( Gryplus hetes ) nonde gunction of chromosomes dining mesisis
don\'t need to know the nitty gritty of memories

# 20.1 Organizing Life on earth 

phylizing =evolutionary history, provide info on show ancestry

1\) can change au time la

phylogenetic tree, hypothèses of genetic part - nord trees do show a
common ancestor

branch point where a single lineage evolved into adistinct. - basaffron
: lineage that evolved early from the worst ( comme ancestor) but
remains unbranched - situ braga : two lineages stemming from the same
place

\- polytomy branch w/ 12 luages noth bog rotation at much points does
not change the information use for Simy systematics - the field
organizing + dass - fying ago bood on evolutionan altships not manchpart

ba

betty show of relationship than physical similarity branch length not
related to time under stated three domains : Bactura, Anhala, Fukanyar

then kingham? phylum ? dass ich 7 family ? genus 7 5ps

\- each levels specific name fur an aomesmo classification

 

# 20.5 Perspective on the phylogenetic tree

free limitations to classic model : genes transferring by unidatid spre
ads hanzental gene transfer (H&T)

-occurs in fong) Prokangoty?, also some in Eukaryotes

gene transfer other than ponent to offspring ( utical gene tranfer)
genetransferamong common bacter mechanismno:

1)transformation

2 )transduction : a uns trungus the genes

3\) conjugations: heller tube (pilus) transfus genes between agermano
gene hansfrugents (GTAz ) transfer sundan genome segnenco ham are
prokaryote spaces to another

jerome frissen:when symbiotic probargate ype uso wecome undernymburtic

HGT has fourmed web of life model over tree of life, many of life also
in the mix theme: limitations of models + scientific advances

A question : how is this at all w/i the scope of an class? what do I
actually need to knowfor the purposes of this class have?

# 27.4 Evolutionary History of the Animal Kingdom

What a specific fossil listing do I actually need to know?

Century explosion- rapid diversification of animals, west unlution of
new animal phyla and mal delivery ever.

New ecological widest adaptation of existing spaces uncomment changes.
New wires speciation and divinity mars extinction some ways the state
diversity change and geological time speciation and extinction
equilibrium of species on planet birth to death marks of evolution of
species on earth.
